EXERCISES
1.

Bacteria cannot be seen with the naked eyes, but these can be seen
with the help of a microscope. If you have to carry a sample from your
home to your biology laboratory to demonstrate the presence of microbes
with the help of a microscope, which sample would you carry and why?

2.

Give examples to prove that microbes release gases during metabolism.

3.

In which food would you find lactic acid bacteria? Mention some of
their useful applications.

4.

Name some traditional Indian foods made of wheat, rice and Bengal
gram (or their products) which involve use of microbes.

5.

In which way have microbes played a major role in controlling diseases
caused by harmful bacteria?

6.

Name any two species of fungus, which are used in the production of
the antibiotics.

7.

What is sewage? In which way can sewage be harmful to us?

8.

What is the key difference between primary and secondary sewage
treatment?

9.

Do you think microbes can also be used as source of energy? If yes, how?

10. Microbes can be used to decrease the use of chemical fertilisers and
pesticides. Explain how this can be accomplished.
11. Three water samples namely river water, untreated sewage water and
secondary effluent discharged from a sewage treatment plant were
subjected to BOD test. The samples were labelled A, B and C; but the
laboratory attendant did not note which was which. The BOD values
of the three samples A, B and C were recorded as 20mg/L, 8mg/L and
400mg/L, respectively. Which sample of the water is most polluted?
Can you assign the correct label to each assuming the river water is
relatively clean?



BIOLOGY

12. Find out the name of the microbes from which Cyclosporin A (an
immunosuppressive drug) and Statins (blood cholesterol lowering
agents) are obtained.
13. Find out the role of microbes in the following and discuss it with your teacher.
(a) Single cell protein (SCP)
(b) Soil
14. Arrange the following in the decreasing order (most important first) of
their importance, for the welfare of human society. Give reasons for
your answer.
Biogas, Citric acid, Penicillin and Curd
15. How do biofertilisers enrich the fertility of the soil?




